# Creating a store from scratch 15m

During the next few lessons we will create our own store from scratch. This will allows to understand what is needed to build a store, how to organize it and to learn a bit more about the Vue Reactivity API. During this lesson we will talk about the Reactivity API and start with a very naive implementation of a store.

## Transcript

In the previous lesson we talked about the what and why of state management and stores. In this lesson, we will create a store from scratch using the Vue Reactivity API. This will allows to understand what is needed to build a store, how to organize it and to learn a bit more about the Vue Reactivity API.

Let's start by reviewing the Core concepts of the [Vue Reactivity API](https://vuejs.org/api/reactivity-core.html).

- `reactive()` allows us to create a reactive object from a plain object (or array) that can be modified. Any changes to it will be magically reflected in the UI.
- `ref()` allows us to create a reactive object that can be both modified and replaced. Because of this extra flexibility we find `ref()` more commonly used than `reactive()` in composables.
- `shallowRef()` is exactly like ref but do not track any modifications. This means only setting its value is tracked by Vue and therefore triggers updates. It's key to improve performance with large data sets and we will talk about it later in the course.

`ref()`, `reactive()` and `shallowRef()` are all means of creating state and if probably already use them within Vue components.

- `computed()` allows us to create a reactive value derived from other reactive values. In the context of stores we name them _getters_.
- `watch()` allows us to watch one or multiple reactive values and run a callback whenever one of them changes. In the context of stores, this is similar to the `$subscribe()` method of a store.

Usually we call these functions **only within the `setup()` of a component**, and we let Vue handle their lifespan. But we can also call them **outside of a component**. In that case they become global and stay reactive forever. Let me show you what I mean.

[SFC Playground](https://play.vuejs.org/#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)

Here (bad-store.js) we have a store that isn't correctly written. It creates the store object the first time it is called and caches it. This way we should be able to share the store, right? Well, not exactly. Let's see what happens when we simulate changing pages.

_Use playground to show how reactivity breaks after toggling_

As you can see the UI only partially updates after toggling the component. This is because the `ref()` are attached to the `<MyPage/>` component instead of being global. Once `<MyPage/>` is destroyed, the `ref()` are destroyed alongside and the store is no longer reactive. If we somehow manage to create the store within the `<App/>` component, the refs will be attached to that component instead, meaning we can toggle `<MyPage/>` without loosing the reactivity:

_Show by uncommenting the `useStore()` call in App.vue_

The automatic handling of the reactivity without components by Vue allows the JS garbage collector to free up memory and for our application to run smoothly. But in this case, we don't Vue to handle things, we want the `ref()` and `computed()` to be global and to never expire, to never be destroyed. How do you think we could achieve that (show MyPage and bad store)? (Give the viewer some time to try by themselves with the code sample. This is not an exercise, just a middle lesson quiz).

We can achieve that by calling `ref()` and `computed()` outside of a component.

_Move code_

We can keep the function for the moment, but we could also just import the store object directly. We will see how this becomes useful later.

When we look at what we implemented here, we still end up with some kind of wrapper object, the `store`. Now you could completely remove that object and directly export functions and state pieces. This would still be considered a state management solution, just not a store. But it's a good way to start and to understand what is needed to build a store thought. However, this solution is not compatible with SSR.

In Server side rendered apps, we need to create one store per application instance in order to avoid sharing state among requests, especially user sensitive information. Not doing so will expose your user's data and also create race condition bugs that are really hard to reproduce and debug due to the requirement of having a race condition. Our current implementation would create a singleton store that is shared among all requests. This is where some more advanced APIs come into play.

Let's wrap it up here with a quick recap of what we learned:

- The Reactivity API `ref()`, `reactive()`, `shallowRef()`, `computed()` and `watch()` are the building blocks of state management within and also outside of components.
- While components collect the state and the logic that is specific to them automatically when created and destroyed, stores are global and need to be created globally.

However we still need to attach these global stores to our application. We will see how to do that in the next lesson.

---

used for the recording

```vue
<script setup>
import { ref, computed, watch } from 'vue'

const count = ref(0)
const double = computed(() => count.value * 2)
watch(count, () => console.log('count changed'))
</script>
```

```js
import { ref, computed, watch } from 'vue'

const count = ref(0)
const double = computed(() => count.value * 2)
watch(count, () => console.log('count changed'))

export function useStore() {
  return { count, double }
}
```
