# Collecting effects with `effectScope()`

During this lesson we keep on building our store from scratch. We will learn how to use `effectScope()` to properly collect all the reactive effects associated to a store.

## Transcript

In the previous lesson, we created a store that is scoped to the component lifecycle then moved the usage of the reactivity API to the global scope to disconnect the store from the component lifecycle.However, this is not ideal for SSR apps: often, when server side render an application, the same node process handles multiple requests. In order to correctly handle the different requests of the user, we create one application for each request. Each application can render a different page and often has a user context associated with it. Often, this kind of state is stored in a store. Therefore we need to create one store per application.

Previously, we were calling the different Reactivity API functions within the `useStore()` function, inconveniently attaching the store to the component lifecycle. So we moved them outside, into the global scope. Which was a bit extreme but works perfectly in Single Page Applications. However, in SSR applications we need to find a middle ground. And this middle ground has a name: `effectScope()`. Let's understand what it is with some examples.

When we are calling the Reactivity API functions within components, we are actually within an `effectScope()` that is created by the component. This `effectScope()` is created when the component is mounted and destroyed when the component is unmounted. We don't have control over it and that's fine as we don't really want to worry about it.

Let's start from this [SFC Playground](https://play.vuejs.org/#eNqVU01v2zAM/SuMLvUa29p6DOxiw047DBiwHX1xHDpxY0uGJCcdDP/3UZK/1qIpevCHyMdH8lHs2be2jS8dsh1LdKGq1oBG07WPmQComlYqAz0oLGGAUskG7gh895+z0/jbSIUzIub7/BBpa4uf9Br88++v/IgzzB9tegeyD+cbMPJ4rJE+0ORnhMrAVaqz90IhhaYaXcJ0zh18yoQFjN6TvLpEqa08MKpD8ifcN0it0cFg09a5Qddosu+MkQK+FnVVnNOMrRg203/GHBbgj6+vtTYbzH208zrD2OYlqsoVV8aAEybhc2oWMi9M1OQtSSUFjaF3NKNDZ2wHzmJtJJQ9Z+xkTKt3nOuysOo96ViqI6e/WHXCVA3GqJtor+RVoyLijIUrDk7GC6pIoTigQnWL8wX0Fa+lHTIxUCvroVMf68sTwjU3xSmk+TRtZ/Dw4jZlosZxqPaAzy607ERhKhrLMmWvRVVCsHHo0TANXowT/0zjttaZoRKFwgaFCfJGkkSE+zLHAoj4ktcdwjYF7/cOamzhPshuT1NP5x4CKid9nGPv4WHM6t/TFe1BhGNwuNThud3LPop2TolJAavmshvvruabsn5wSZcFKkaNFi1va+DwXod7q8LtZfMdAHy3UXS9+zHfMMTrAzzDg9Wvn9IOTq6E+/hXO+vittt5TX/MWgcrVtfNamXX6zj8A6zIsvU=) and experiment with it:

- toggling resets the counter
- effectScope() around the count but not the double
  - move outside in a second script
  - talk a bit about the ability of having a second script
- refactor into `useCount()` [Playground](https://play.vuejs.org/#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)
- Explain that now the computed is still per component but doesn't need to be since it relies only on store state
- move to outter script
- explain we can have multiple `effect.run()` and that it can be called as many times as you want
- But this is still not correct because the `effectScope()` is also a reactivity api and it's also attached to any scope it is created within
- [Playground](https://play.vuejs.org/#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)
- The app we have seems like it's working but it's not. Remove all usage of the `count` in template and leave just the double, then increment the count. toggle and increment again. The double doesn't update
- We need to detach the effect from the component it is created at by passing a detached argument to `true` to `effectScope()`.
- Everything works

To sumarize, components automatically collect effects (ref, computed, watchers, etc) and dispose them when the component is unmounted. This is internally achieved by components by creating a scope. We have access to this low level API to collect reactive effects ourselves and dispose them when we want. This gives use the flexibility to create more advanced patterns like stores. However, we haven't seen yet how to limit the create one `effectScope()` per application. We will see that in the next lesson by introducing `inject()` and `provide()`.
