# Dependency Injection with `provide()` / `inject()`

## Description

In this lesson, we will learn how to use `provide()` and `inject()` in Vue.js to avoid prop drilling and make our store compatible with server-side rendering (SSR). This will allow us to finish our store implementation and make it (almost!) production-ready.

## Context

In the previous lesson, we explored the usage of `effectScope()` and refactored our store to incorporate it. We also implemented a `defineStore()` function that handles the `effectScope()` behind the scenes.

## Transcript

Welcome back! In our previous lesson, we learned about `effectScope()` and how it helps us instantiate our store globally. This is beneficial for server-side rendering (SSR) purposes. However, our stores are still global and not fully compatible with SSR because the `effectScope()` instances we create are themselves global. But don't worry, we're getting closer to the solution!

To address this issue and recognize the application instance calling `useStore()`, we need to delve into the world of Dependency Injection with `inject()` and `provide()`. These two functions allow us to implicitly pass data from parent to child components, effectively avoiding prop drilling. It's a powerful feature that should be used judiciously since it introduces implicit coupling between components.

Normally, when we want to make data available to all child components, we pass it down as props from the root component to any component that needs it. However, this approach, known as _prop drilling_, leads to unnecessary artificial props and boilerplate code when the prop is not needed by all components. This is where `provide()` and `inject()` come to the rescue. With these functions, we can `provide()` data at any point in the component tree (show [code](https://vuejs.org/guide/components/provide-inject.html#provide) explain key and value), we can even provide at the application level to make something available everywhere. Then we use `inject()` with the same key at any lower level in the tree (show in docs)

At this stage, the concept might not be entirely clear, so let's see some real-world examples:

- Let's start with a simple one: passing down a global value. Most libraries, such as Vue Router and Pinia themselves, use this technique to pass down global properties:

  - For example, Vue Router provides the router and route at the app level using `provide()`: [Example](https://github.com/vuejs/router/blob/main/packages/router/src/router.ts#L1264-L1266)
  - The `useRouter()` and `useRoute()` functions are just wrappers around `inject()`: [Example](https://github.com/vuejs/router/blob/main/packages/router/src/useApi.ts)

  We could in fact, provide the router with a different injection key (show how we provide `router` in code app, not sfc playground). A more application-level use case is to provide an alert manager that can be used by any component to show a notification. You can even inject a global `reactive()` object to share state between components as a very simple state management solution (show `provide('state', reactive({}))`).

  - Another use case for inject provide is communicate between coupled components, this means that the parent and child components are meant to be used in conjunction, for example you could think af o `<NavBar/>` component with `<NavItem/>` as its children, or a recursive `<TreeFile>` component. In this [Code sample](https://play.vuejs.org/#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) we have a TreeFile component that displays a file tree structure. It starts uncollapsed by default so it can get very long if I have a lot of files. I could also collapse everything by default but I would rather still show the files at the root level (show the expected starting case to be root with documents and other visible). Do you see how to implement this using inject and provide? Let's make the "documents" and "other" visible while all their children start collapsed. Go ahead, pause the video and try to implement it yourself, I will give you the solutions in a few instants.
  - [Playground Solution](https://play.vuejs.org/#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)

(If the video is too long here, split in two)

Now that we have the solution working, let's explore what can and should be used as keys for `inject` and `provide`. We can use a string but we risk colliding with other injection keys used by components. In general, when developing an application, this shouldn't be a problem, but when developing a library, using a Symbol ensures that we don't collide with other libraries or user code. Let's see how to use a Symbol as a key for `inject` and `provide`. We could be tempted to create the Symbol within script setup but as you can see, it doesn't work. We need to move it to a different file or the another script without setup to avoid creating a new symbol for each component instance. So let's add a new script and move it there. The last missing piece now is TypeScript. I don't have any typings on the playground, so let's move it to a local file to show you what I mean.

The nature of `inject()` and `provide()` functions make things untyped. Fortunately, Vue exposes a Type helper called `InjectionKey` which is meant to be used with Symbols. Let's use it here to correctly type `depth` (do it). As you can see, `depth` is now properly recognized as a number (quickly explain that fallback argument also works).

Here we are providing a number but we can provide really anything. A reactive object, a function, even a composable if we want to. We are also calling `provide()` within a component but we can also call it directly at the App level with `app.provide()` like we saw before in Vue Router code.


To recap, we have seen how to use `inject` and `provide` to pass down data from a parent component to a child component. We have seen how to use a string as a key for `inject` and `provide` but we have seen that it can be problematic when developing a library. So we saw how to use a Symbol instead and how to type it correctly. I think we are ready to improve our store with this, see you in the next lesson for an exercise.

## Exercises

- Passing down an existing global like the router with a string
- Reusing an injected property like depth
- Injecting functions (e.g. notifications) -> transform into composables
